See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/3887632
Diatom autofocusing in brighteld microscopy: a comparative study
J. L. Pech-Pacheco & G. Cristobal
Imaging & Vision Dept.
Instituto de Optica (CSIC)
Serrano 121, 28006 Madrid. Spain
fpech,gabrielg@optica.csic.es
J. Chamorro-Martnez & J. Fernandez-Valdivia
Depto. Ciencias de la Computacion e I.A.
ETS de Ingeniera Informatica
Avda. Andaluca, 38, 18071 Granada. Spain
fjesus,J.Fdez-Valdiviag@decsai.ugr.es
Abstract
We present a number autofocusing methods in light-
ning microscopy for its use in diatom identication.
Among these, the Tenengrad method has been consid-
ered one of the best. The basic requirements for a prac-
tical autofocusing system are speed, sharpness and ro-
bustness to noise.Recently other focus measures based
on a modied Laplacian method are said to perform bet-
ter than Tenengrad. We investigate two sound methods
based on a modied Tenengrad and a modied Lapla-
cian. Measurements show that provide a reliable and
suitable focus measure than other similar methods. We
investigate the window size analysis dependency and
perform an univariate analysis on the focus measures.
The focusing techniques are implemented in an auto-
matic slide scanning system for diatom detection and
identication for its use in the ADIAC project. 1
1. Introduction
Diatoms are unicelular algae related with brown al-
gae that grow anywhere where there exists enough light
and moisture. They are ecologically very important
because they contribute around the 20% of the world's
carbon xation [3]. Besides the ecological interest,
there exists a number of other elds where diatom
analysis is useful: geological, climatological, geograph-
ical,archeological or forensic research. Many applica-
tions diatom analysis require both the presence of ex-
perts and the identication of a large range of diatom
species and therefore are tedious and time consuming.
However, most of the existent computer-based diatom
analysis methods do not tackle the whole automatiza-
tion process [2, 7]. One key aspect in the automati-
1This work has been supported in part by the follow-
ing Grants: EU ADIAC MAS3-CT97-0122 and EU INCO-DC
AMOVIP 961646 Project
zation process is to determine reliable and fast autofo-
cusing methods. Groen et al [4] has identied eight
dierent criteria for comparing autofocus algorithms
[4]. Many focusing techniques have been proposed in
the literature [5, 9, 10, 6, 1]. Most of them extract a
focus measure that gives a maximum for the best fo-
cused image. Defocus algorithms be classied into two
categories: those based on the statistical variance pixel
values and those based on spatial-frequency content of
the image. In this paper, we propose new algorithms
based on the computation of the variance of the im-
age gradient or image Laplacian that provides sharper
focus measures than the pure variance-based or pure
spatial-based methods for a similar computational cost.
2. Materials and dataset
Dierent diatom samples from fresh water and hu-
man tissue 2 were analyzed with a Zeiss Axiophot pho-
tomicroscope illuminated with a 100W halogen light
with 40X lenses. For image acquisition, we used a Scion
frame grabber that includes the NIH image processing
shareware connected to a CCD analog camera from
Pulnix. Two PC image analysis systems (Pentium II
&III) were used one for image acquisition and the other
one for algorithm computation. Furthermore, for com-
puter intensive calculations a SUN Enterprise 450 with
four processors was used. Images have been digitized
with 8 bit/pixel and 256x256 pixel image format. The
microscope slide was moved with a X-Y-Z motorized
stage from Prior Instruments, with a step size of 0.1
m for the X-Y axis and 1 m for the Z-axis.
Fig. 1 shows some images of strewn slides with many
diatoms and other biological debris.
2We thank Dr. M. Bayer from Royal Botanical Garden Ed-
inburgh and Dr. B. Ludes from Inst. of Legal Medicine (Univ.
Louis Pasteur) for providing us some sample slides of diatoms
1
Figure 1. Examples of diatoms with some biological
detritus
3. Methods
We have evaluated seven focus measures and
selected those that perform the best. The criteria used
were: (i) Variance (it depends upon the probability
distribution and not its spatial distribution); (ii)
Entropy (a measure of the histogram uniformity. It
fails with images with complicated texture); (iii)
Tenengrad (based on Sobel gradient); (iv) Brenner
(gradient);(v) Sobel+variance; (vi) Laplacian and (vii)
Laplacian+variance. We describe here the variance
method (i) and the two proposed methods (v) and (vii).
3.1. Local variance
Let us assume a stack of k images of size MxN
taken by changing the microscope focus in steps of 1
m. Fig. 2 shows some examples of the image stack
above and below the best focused image located at the
center of the panel. The local variance at point (m,n),
m=1,...,M and n=1,...,N is given by:
lvk(m; n) =
1
wxwy
wx
Xi
=0
wy
Xj
=0
[fk(m+ i; n + j) 􀀀 fk(m; n)]2
(1)
where fk represents the mean value:
fk(m; n) =
1
wxwy
wx
Xi =
0
wy
Xi
=0
[fk(m + i; n + j)] (2)
(3)
Figure 2. Stack of 9 images at different focus
planes
and the nal focus measure, will be given by the global
variance of the previous local variance image:
fmV
k =
1
MN
M
X
m=0
N
X
n=0
[lvk(m; n) 􀀀 lvk(m; n)]2 (4)
where fmV
k gives the focus measure for the image k
and lvk is the global variance value:
lvk =
1
MN
M
X
m=0
N
X
n=0
[lvk(m; n)] (5)
3.2. Variance of gradient magnitude
The use of image gradients (either the rst or second
derivatives) are instrumental in order to determine a
reliable focus measure. In particular the Tenengrad
method is considered as a benchmark in this eld. The
method is based on computing the gradient magnitude
of a Sobel operator:
gk(m; n) = qgx(m; n)2 + gy(m; n)2 (6)
where gx(m; n) and gy(m; n) are the convolutions with
the kernels:  􀀀1 0 1
􀀀2 0 2
􀀀1 0 1  1 2 1
0 0 0
􀀀1 􀀀2 􀀀1  respectively.
For each image m in the stack, the Tenengrad method
provides a focus measure given by:
fmG
k =Xm
Xn
[gk(m; n)]2 (7)
The best focused image will be given by the maximum
of fmG
k .
3.3. Variance of Laplacian magnitude
This technique is similar to gradient magnitude
but using a second derivative operator. We use the
Laplacian with the convolution kernel:
1
6  0 􀀀1 0
􀀀1 4 1
0 􀀀1 0  The method is based on computing the
absolute value of the Laplacian operator.
4. Results
Here we propose a variant of this method based
on use the variance of the magnitude of the Sobel
gradient. The rationale of this approach is to dene
a more discriminative measure similar to a second
derivative (Laplacian) but increasing the robustness
to noise. Fig. 3a,b shows a comparison of focus
measurements without and with noise respectively 3.
a
b
Figure 3. Focus measures (4 methods)
3For a subjective focus and image fusion assessment see:
http://www.iv.optica.csic.es/projects/autof.html
4.1. Window size selection
Another criteria to take into account is the window
size selection for variance and gradient calculation.
Fig. 4a shows as a box plot that the variance method
provide a better focus estimate for small windows, but
with the tradeo of a higher computational cost than
large windows. However, Fig. 4b shows that the Sobel
variance provides better results for large windows that
leads to a reduction in the computational complexity.
Next, we analyze the shape of the focus measures.
a
b
Figure 4. Window size evaluation. (a) Variance
measure. (b) Variance of Sobel measure.
Horizontal axis gives window size as
percentage of the full image size. The zero
level corresponds to best focus.
4.2. Focus assessment
 Sharpness. Sharpness is not the only criteria for
selecting a good focus measure. In fact, as Subbarao
et al [9] has pointed out any focus measure can be
articially sharpened by simply squaring the focus
measure. Kurtosis is a candidate for peakedness.
However it suers of a high noise sensitivity. We
dene an progresive sharpness measure based on the
absolute sum of dierences of three equidistant focus
levels from the maximum value:
F1 = k1Xi
6=j
jdi 􀀀 dj j (8)
where di and dj represent the level intersections in the
central lobe of the focus measure (Fig. 3b) and k1
is a normalized constant. Fig. 5 shows that both
Sobel+variance and Tenengrad methods provide the
sharper focus response (i.e. a smaller F1 value).
Figure 5. Focus noisy measures peakedness
results for four selected methods
 Smoothness and noise sensitivity
We dene a relative measure based on an accumulative
sum of the absolute gradient value of the focus measure
(Fig. 3) with respect to a tting Gaussian with ( = 1).
F2 = Pk jAF0
kj
Pk jAFkjG
(9)
where AF0
k represents the rst derivative of the focus
measure. Next table shows that both Sobel+variance
and Tenengrad methods provide the smaller values of
F2 that correspond to a better noise tolerance.
Sobel+var Tenengrad Laplacian Laplacian+var
1.0411 1.0646 2.507 2.101
4.3. Multifocus
fusion techniques
Since diatoms have a 3-D valve we are investigating
fusion-based methods for combining dierent focal
planes. We tested several fusion methods and asked
to a group of diatom experts about the best result.
Fig. 6 shows the fused image selected by the experts
from a stack of 8 focus planes. We used a Laplacian
pyramid-based method for its calculation [8]. The
recombination process produces a contrast enhanced
image and the ne diatom striae becomes more visible
Figure 6. Fused example corresponding to a
stack of 8 images
References
[1] W. Bocker, W. Rolf, W. Muller, and C. Streer. Inves-
tigations about autofocus-algorithms for 
uorescent-
microscopy. In SPIE Applications of Digital Image
Processing XIX, volume 2847, pages 445{456, Denver,
CO, 1996.
[2] J. Cairns, K. Dickson, G. Lanza, S. Almeida, and
D. del Balzo. Coherent optical spatial ltering of di-
atoms in water pollution monitoring. Archiv. Mikro-
biol., 83:141{146, 1972.
[3] C. Field, M. Behrenfeld, J. Randerson, and
P. Falkowski. Primary production of the biosphere:
integrating terrestrial and oceanic components. Sci-
ence, 281:237{240, 1998.
[4] F. Groen, I. Young, and G. Ligthard. A comparison
of dierent focus functions for use in autofocus algo-
rithms. Cytometry, 6:81{91, 1985.
[5] E. Krotkov. Focusing. Int. J. Comp. Vision, 1:223{
237, 1987.
[6] S. K. Nayar and Y. Nakagawa. Shape from fo-
cus. IEEE Trans. on Patt. Anal. and Machine Intell.,
16(8):824{831, 1994.
[7] J. Pech-Pacheco and J. Alvarez-Borrego. Optical-
digital system applied to the identication of ve phy-
toplancton species. Mar. Biol., 132:357{365, 1998.
[8] O. Rockinger. Multiresolution-Verfahren zur fusion
dynamischer bildfolgen. PhD thesis, Technischen Uni-
versitat Berlin, 1999.
[9] M. Subarao and A. Nikzad. Focusing techniques. Opt.
Eng., 32(11):2824{2836, 1993.
[10] T. Yeo, S. Ong, Jayasooriah, and R. Sinniah. Autofo-
cusing for tissue microscopy. Image and Vision Comp.,
11(10):629{639, 1993.
View publication stats
